Blog post about the amount of magic (#819)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2021-01-12-magic-control.adoc

---
layout: post
title: Bored with magic tricks?
date: 2021-01-06 # Update the date before publication
tags: vertx
synopsis: How to control the amount of magic from Quarkus
author: cescoffier
---

Just before my PTO, someone told me: '_I don't like magic._'
In this context, _magic_ refers to the amount of hidden _stuff_ done by Quarkus under the hood for the sake of simplicity.
It includes dependency injection, annotations, and so on.

It's not the first time that I get that kind of comment, and coming from the Vert.x project, it makes sense.
Vert.x has (almost) no magic, and for a good reason: too much magic can be terrible and make production tuning utterly expensive.
Sometimes you want to have more control and avoid unexpected behaviors: execute the code you wrote, and nothing else.

> But let's come back to Quarkus.

Author: Added.

It also enables native packaging (as that extension contains the directive to compile Vert.x applications to native).

In your pom.xml file, just add the following dependency:

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-vertx-core</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

With this, the _run_ method becomes:

[source, java]
----
@Override
public int run(String... args) {
    Vertx vertx = CDI.current().select(Vertx.class).get();
    Router router = Router.router(vertx);

    String message = ConfigProvider.getConfig().getValue("message", String.class);

    router.get("/").handler(rc -> rc.response().end(message + " world!"));
    router.get("/stop").handler(rc -> {
        rc.response().end("bye");
        Quarkus.asyncExit();
    });

    HttpServer server = vertx.createHttpServer()
            .requestHandler(router)
            .listen(8080);

    Quarkus.waitForExit();

    server.close();
    return 0;
}
----

Note how it retrieves the managed Vert.x instance.
While you can use `@Inject`, you can also retrieve it programmatically.

> The rest of the code does not change.

Author: Added.

We can still start it from the IDE using the _main_ method.

If you don't include the `quarkus-vertx-core` extension (or any extension depending on it), Quarkus won't create the Vert.x instance.

> As said above, you can package this application as a native executable:

Author: Added.

Instead of ``quarkus-vertx-core`, use `quarkus-vertx-http`:

[source, xml]
----
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <artifactId>quarkus-vertx-http</artifactId>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
----

No need to depend on Vert.x Web directly, it's included.

You will still register your routes, but using a managed `Router`:

[source, java]
----
@Override
public int run(String... args) {
    Router router = CDI.current().select(Router.class).get();

    String message = ConfigProvider.getConfig().getValue("message", String.class);

    router.get("/").handler(rc -> rc.response().end(message));
    router.get("/bye").handler(rc -> {
        rc.response().end("bye");
        Quarkus.asyncExit();
    });

    Quarkus.waitForExit();
    return 0;
}
----

That approach enables the Quarkus hot reload as it intercepts the HTTP requests.
You are still in control of everything related to your application logic.

You can start the hot reload using:

[source, shell script]
----
> mvn quarkus:dev
----

> == Summary

Reviewer: Should you have one section where Quarkus is started and not stopped (i.e. not needing the main method?

Author: Do you mean having a bean with @Startup?

Reviewer: more like the RESTEasy (reactive) like model where the routes are hosted on a class and the server is de facto started. Not sure I'm super clear but it's the full magic one.

BTW this magic business made me thing of It's a kind of magic line by Queen. Do you mind combing your hair and using a Mercury outfit. It would make a good picture for the blog post 👍 

I would do it but you're dark hair like him and I'm not.

Author: Ah, I see, yes, adding a section with the "regular" model. Good idea, so it covers the full spectrum.

About your suggestion, unfortunately, I'm way shorter than Mercury (and a lot fatter). I guess you can color your hair. 

Note: This PR review contains a reference to Carla Bruni and a reference to Queen... That's going to be a long year...

---
layout: post
title: Bored with magic tricks?
date: 2021-01-06 # Update the date before publication
tags: vertx
synopsis: How to control the amount of magic from Quarkus
author: cescoffier
---

> Just before my PTO, someone told me: '_I don't like magic._'

Reviewer 2: I thought that would turn into a Carla Bruni song.

Reviewer 3: Can we get the Carla Bruni version too? I’m curious now.

Reviewer 2: "Someone told me... that you didn't like magiiiiic"

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EelX_LwPHbA

In this context, _magic_ refers to the amount of hidden _stuff_ done by Quarkus under the hood for the sake of simplicity.
It includes dependency injection, annotations, and so on.

> It's not the first time I get that kind of comment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's not the first time that I get that kind of comment.
```

> And coming from the Vert.x project, it makes sense.

Reviewer 2: Join with the previous sentence, separate with a comma. That'll flow better.

> Vert.x has almost no magic, and for a good reason: too much magic can be terrible and make production tuning utterly expensive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Vert.x has  no magic, and for a good reason: too much magic can be terrible and make production tuning utterly expensive.
```

Author: well... I kind of disagree. There is some magic in Vert.x. TCP round robin is a bit magic. Let's put _almost_ in parenthesis.

Reviewer 2: Let's say TCP round robin on network ports to verticles is less magic than what Panache does to your entity 😉 

But parens are fine to me.

> Sometimes you want to have more control and avoid unexpected behavior: execute the code you wrote, and nothing else.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes you want to have more control and avoid unexpected behaviours: execute the code you wrote, and nothing else.
```

But let's come back to Quarkus.
You may think that Quarkus has a lot of magic tricks.

> That's not wrong, but you can decide the amount of magic you want and the amount of control you feel comfortable with.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is true, but you can decide the amount of magic that you want and the amount of control you feel comfortable with.
```

You don't have to use dependency injection or managed clients if you prefer doing things yourself.

In this post, we will cover three different approaches to reducing the amount of magic.
We will go from almost no magic to just enough to get a good developer experience.
Examples from this blog post are available on https://github.com/cescoffier/quarkus-magic-control[GitHub].

== The _almost no magic_ approach

Quarkus applications are Java applications.
So, somewhere there is a `public static void main(String... args)`.

> While in general, when you are using Quarkus, you don't need to write that method; it can be convenient and give you more control about your application's startup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While you don't need to write that method when using Quarkus, it can still be convenient and give you more control about your application startup.
```

import io.quarkus.runtime.Quarkus;
import io.quarkus.runtime.QuarkusApplication;
import io.quarkus.runtime.annotations.QuarkusMain;
import io.vertx.core.Vertx;
import io.vertx.core.http.HttpServer;
import io.vertx.ext.web.Router;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.config.ConfigProvider;

@QuarkusMain
public class Main implements QuarkusApplication {

    public static void main(String... args) {
        Quarkus.run(Main.class, args);
    }

    @Override
    public int run(String... args) {
        Vertx vertx = Vertx.vertx();
        Router router = Router.router(vertx);

        String message = ConfigProvider.getConfig().getValue("message", String.class);

        router.get("/").handler(rc -> rc.response().end(message));
        router.get("/bye").handler(rc -> {
            rc.response().end("bye");
            Quarkus.asyncExit();
        });

        HttpServer server = vertx.createHttpServer()
                .requestHandler(router)
                .listen(8080);

        Quarkus.waitForExit();

        server.close();
        return 0;
    }
}
----

The complete source code is available https://github.com/cescoffier/quarkus-magic-control/tree/main/no-magic-example[here].

> Don't expect much more; the application had only one Java class, but let's look at it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Don't expect much more; the application had only one Java class, but let's look into it.
```

The `@QuarkusMain` indicates that Quarkus should use this class as the _main entry point_ of the application.
The `run` method contains your application logic.
We will come back to this logic later.
First, look at the `public static void main(String... args)` method.
It just starts the application.

> You can use this entry point from your IDE directly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use this entry point directly from your IDE.
```

[source, java]
----
@Override
public int run(String... args) {
    Vertx vertx = CDI.current().select(Vertx.class).get();
    Router router = Router.router(vertx);

    String message = ConfigProvider.getConfig().getValue("message", String.class);

    router.get("/").handler(rc -> rc.response().end(message + " world!"));
    router.get("/stop").handler(rc -> {
        rc.response().end("bye");
        Quarkus.asyncExit();
    });

    HttpServer server = vertx.createHttpServer()
            .requestHandler(router)
            .listen(8080);

    Quarkus.waitForExit();

    server.close();
    return 0;
}
----

Note how it retrieves the managed Vert.x instance.
While you can use `@Inject`, you can also retrieve it programmatically.
The rest of the code does not change.
We can still start it from the IDE using the _main_ method.

If you don't include the `quarkus-vertx-core` extension (or any extension depending on it), Quarkus won't create the Vert.x instance.

As said above, you can package this application as a native executable:

[source, shell script]
----
> mvn package -Dnative
...
> ./target/managed-vertx-example-1.0-SNAPSHOT-runner
----

> But, still no hot reload :-(

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But, still no hot reload 😿 
```

</dependencies>
----

No need to depend on Vert.x Web directly, it's included.

You will still register your routes, but using a managed `Router`:

[source, java]
----
@Override
public int run(String... args) {
    Router router = CDI.current().select(Router.class).get();

    String message = ConfigProvider.getConfig().getValue("message", String.class);

    router.get("/").handler(rc -> rc.response().end(message));
    router.get("/bye").handler(rc -> {
        rc.response().end("bye");
        Quarkus.asyncExit();
    });

    Quarkus.waitForExit();
    return 0;
}
----

That approach enables the Quarkus hot reload as it intercepts the HTTP requests.
You are still in control of everything related to your application logic.

You can start the hot reload using:

[source, shell script]
----
> mvn quarkus:dev
----

== Summary

Our relation to magic depends on our background and experience.
Quarkus lets you decide how much magic you accept.
This post presented three configurations, going from almost no magic to using the managed HTTP server.
Each approach has pros and cons:

|===
| |Control | Build time optimizations | Native executable | Hot Reload

|_Almost no magic_
|Full

> |🥵

Reviewer 2: Nice, I see that the life lessons from @k33g about emojis are percolating 😇
